Restructuring Expressions (#697)
neo4j/docs-cypher: modules/ROOT/pages/queries/basic.adoc

(AngelaScope)-[:REVIEWED {summary:'Pretty funny at times', rating:62}]->(TheReplacements),
(JessicaThompson)-[:REVIEWED {summary:'Dark, but compelling', rating:85}]->(Unforgiven),
(JessicaThompson)-[:REVIEWED {summary:"Slapstick redeemed only by the Robin Williams and Gene Hackman's stellar performances", rating:45}]->(TheBirdcage),
(JessicaThompson)-[:REVIEWED {summary:'A solid romp', rating:68}]->(TheDaVinciCode),
(JamesThompson)-[:REVIEWED {summary:'Fun, but a little far fetched', rating:65}]->(TheDaVinciCode),
(JessicaThompson)-[:REVIEWED {summary:'You had me at Jerry', rating:92}]->(JerryMaguire)
----
////

== Finding nodes

The `MATCH` clause is used to find a specific pattern in the graph, such as a specific node. 
The `RETURN` clause specifies what of the found graph pattern to return. 

For example, this query will find the nodes with `Person` label and the name `Keanu Reeves`, and return the `name` and `born` properties of the found nodes:

.Query
[source, cypher]
----
MATCH (keanu:Person {name:'Keanu Reeves'})
RETURN keanu.name AS name, keanu.born AS born
----

.Result
[role="queryresult",options="header,footer",cols="2*<m"]
|===
| name | born

| "Keanu Reeves"

> | 1964

Reviewer: I know this still renders fine, but the line break is confusing to see in a table with one row :)

2+d|Rows: 1
|===

It is also possible to query a graph for several nodes. 
This query matches all nodes with the `Person` label, and limits the results to only include five rows.

.Query
[source, cypher, role=test-result-skip]
----
MATCH (people:Person)
RETURN people
LIMIT 5
----

.Result
[role="queryresult",options="header,footer",cols="1*<m"]
|===
| people

| {"born":1964,"name":"Keanu Reeves"}
| {"born":1967,"name":"Carrie-Anne Moss"}
| {"born":1961,"name":"Laurence Fishburne"}
| {"born":1960,"name":"Hugo Weaving"}
| {"born":1967,"name":"Lilly Wachowski"}

1+d|Rows: 5
|===

== Note on clause composition

Similar to SQL, Cypher queries are constructed using various clauses which are chained together to feed intermediate results between each other. 

> Each clause has as input the state of the graph and a table of intermediate results consisting of the current variables.

Reviewer: This paragraph was a little hard to follow

The first clause takes as input the state of the graph before the query and an empty table of intermediate results.
The output of a clause is a new state of the graph and a new table of intermediate results, serving as input to the next clause. 
The output of the last clause is the result of the query.

Note that if one of the clauses returns an empty table of intermediate results, there is nothing to pass on to subsequent clauses, thus ending the query.
(There are ways to circumvent this behaviour. 
For example, by replacing a `MATCH` clause with xref:clauses/optional-match.adoc[OPTIONAL MATCH].)

In the below example, the first `MATCH` clause finds all nodes with the `Person` label.

> The second clause will then filter those nodes to find all `Person` nodes who were bron in the 1980s.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The second clause will then filter those nodes to find all `Person` nodes who were born in the 1980s.
```

The final clause returns the result in a descending chronological order.

.Query
[source, cypher]
----
MATCH (bornInEighties:Person)
WHERE bornInEighties.born >= 1980 AND bornInEighties.born < 1990 

> RETURN bornInEighties.name as name, bornInEighties.born as born ORDER BY born DESC 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
RETURN bornInEighties.name as name, bornInEighties.born as born 
ORDER BY born DESC 
```

|===
| name | born

| "Emile Hirsch"
| 1985

| "Rain"
| 1982

| "Natalie Portman"
| 1981

| "Christina Ricci"
| 1980

2+d|Rows: 4
|===

For more details, see the section on xref:clauses/clause_composition.adoc[].

== Finding connected nodes

To discover how nodes are connected to one another, relationships must be added to queries.
Queries can specify relationship types, properties, and direction, as well as the start and end nodes of the pattern.

For example, the following query matches the graph for the director of the movie the Matrix, and returns the `name` property of its directors. 

.Query
[source, cypher]
----
MATCH (m:Movie {title: 'The Matrix'})<-[d:DIRECTED]-(p:Person)
RETURN p.name as director
----

.Result
[role="queryresult",options="header,footer",cols="1*<m"]
|===
| director

| "Lilly Wachowski"
| "Lana Wachowski"
1+d|Rows: 2

|===

It also possible to look for the type of relationships that connect nodes to one another. 
The below query searches the graph for outgoing relationships from the `Tom Hanks` node to any `Movie` nodes, and returns the relationships and the titles of the movies connected to him. 

.Query
[source, cypher]
----

> MATCH (tom:Person {name:'Tom Hanks'})-[r]->(m:Movie)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
MATCH (:Person {name:'Tom Hanks'})-[r]->(m:Movie)
```

> Return type(r), m.title AS movies

Reviewer: ```suggestion
RETURN type(r) AS type, m.title AS movie
```

----

> The graph returned shows that he has 13 outgoing relationships connected to 12 different `Movie` nodes (12 have the `ACTED_IN` type and one has the `DIRECTED` type).

Reviewer: This query doesn't return a graph, it returns a table of type and movie titles

image::introduction_example1.svg[width="500",role="middle"]

.Result
[role="queryresult",options="header,footer",cols="2*<m"]
|===

> |+type(r)+ | +movies+

Reviewer: ```suggestion
|+type+ | +movie+
```

| "ACTED_IN" | "Apollo 13"

| "ACTED_IN" | "You've Got Mail"

| "ACTED_IN" | "A League of Their Own"

| "ACTED_IN" | "That Thing You Do"

| "ACTED_IN" | "The Da Vinci Code"

| "ACTED_IN" | "Cloud Atlas"

| "ACTED_IN" | "Joe versus the Volcano"

| "ACTED_IN" | "Cast Away"

| "ACTED_IN" | "The Green Mile"

| "ACTED_IN" | "Sleepless in Seattle"

| "ACTED_IN" | "The Polar Express"

| "ACTED_IN" | "Charlie Wilson's War"

| "DIRECTED" | "That Thing You Do"

2+d|Rows: 13
|===

It is possible to further modify Cypher queries by adding label expressions to the clauses.

> For example, the below query uses a `NOT` expression (`!`) to return all relationships connected to `Tom Hanks` that does not contain the specified type, `ACTED_IN`. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For example, the below query uses a `NOT` expression (`!`) to return all relationships connected to `Tom Hanks` that do not contain the specified type, `ACTED_IN`. 
```

I am also unsure if you would want to say a `NOT` expression as `NOT` is a keyword used in Cypher, but not in this case

.Query
[source, cypher]
----
MATCH (tom:Person {name:'Tom Hanks'})-[r:!ACTED_IN]->(m:Movie)

> Return type(r), m.title AS movies

Reviewer: ```suggestion
MATCH (Person {name:'Tom Hanks'})-[r:!ACTED_IN]->(m:Movie)
RETURN type(r) AS type, m.title AS movie
```

----

.Result
[role="queryresult",options="header,footer",cols="2*<m"]
|===

> | type(r) | movies

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| type | movie
```

| "DIRECTED" | "That Thing You Do"

2+d|Rows: 1
|===

For more information about the different label expressions supported by Cypher, see the section on xref:patterns/reference.adoc#label-expressions[label expressions].

== Finding paths

There are several ways in which Cypher can be used to search a graph for paths between nodes.

To search for patterns of a fixed length, specify the distance ("hops") between the nodes in the pattern by using a xref::patterns/reference.adoc#quantifiers[quantifier] (`\{n}`). 

> For example, the following query matches all `Person` nodes exactly 2 "hops" away from `Tom Hanks` and returns the first five rows, in ascending order of the `born` property value of the `colleagues` nodes.

Reviewer: This is a very long sentence

Author: Yeah - I think it can just be (returns the first five rows) - the query makes evident the other more wordy part.

The xref:syntax/operators.adoc#syntax-using-the-distinct-operator[DISTINCT] operator ensures that the result contain no duplicate values. 

.Query
[source, cypher]
----
MATCH (tom:Person {name:'Tom Hanks'})--{2}(colleagues:Person)
RETURN DISTINCT colleagues.name AS name, colleagues.born AS bornIn  

> ORDER BY bornIn LIMIT 5

Reviewer: ```suggestion
MATCH (:Person {name:'Tom Hanks'})--{2}(colleagues:Person)
RETURN DISTINCT colleagues.name AS name, colleagues.born AS bornIn  
ORDER BY bornIn 
LIMIT 5
```

----

.Result
[role="queryresult",options="header,footer",cols="2*<m"]
|===
| name | bornIn

| "Mike Nichols" | 1931
| "Ian McKellen" | 1939
| "James Cromwell" | 1940
| "Nora Ephron" | 1941
| "Penny Marshall" | 1943

2+d|Rows: 5
|===

It is also possible to match a graph for patterns of a variable length. 
The below query matches all `Person` nodes between `1` and `4` "hops" away from `Tom Hanks` and returns the first five rows, in ascending order of the `born` and `name` property values of the `colleagues` nodes.

.Query
[source, cypher, role=test-result-skip]
----
MATCH (p:Person {name:'Tom Hanks'})--{1,4}(colleagues:Person)
RETURN DISTINCT colleagues.name AS name, colleagues.born AS bornIn  

> ORDER BY bornIn, name LIMIT 5

Reviewer: ```suggestion
MATCH (:Person {name:'Tom Hanks'})--{1,4}(colleagues:Person)
RETURN DISTINCT colleagues.name AS name, colleagues.born AS bornIn  
ORDER BY bornIn, name
LIMIT 5
```

----

.Result
[role="queryresult",options="header,footer",cols="2*<m"]
|===
| name | bornIn

| "Max von Sydow" | 1929
| "Clint Eastwood" | 1930
| "Gene Hackman"| 1930
| "Richard Harris" | 1930
| "Mike Nichols" | 1931

2+d|Rows: 5
|===

[NOTE]
====
The quantifier used in the above two examples was introduced with the release of xref::patterns/concepts.adoc#quantified-path-patterns[quantified path patterns] in Neo4j 5.9.
Before that, the only way in Cypher to match paths of a variable length was with a variable-length relationship.
This syntax is still available in Cypher. 
Read more about it xref::patterns/reference.adoc#variable-length-relationships[here].
====

To find the shortest possible path between two nodes, use the `shortestPath` algorithm.
For example, this query matches the shorest path in the graph between the two nodes `Tom Hanks` and `Keanu Reeves`:

.Query
[source, cypher]
----
MATCH p=shortestPath(

> (keanu:Person {name:"Keanu Reeves"})-[*]-(tom:Person {name:"Tom Hanks"})

Reviewer: ```suggestion
(:Person {name:"Keanu Reeves"})-[*]-(:Person {name:"Tom Hanks"})
```

)
RETURN p
----

> This is the returned graph:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This is the returned path:
```

image::introduction_example2.svg[width="500",role="middle]

It shows that `Keanu Reeves` `ACTED_IN` the `Movie` `The Replacements`, which was `REVIEWED` by the movie critic `Jessica Thompson`, who also `REVIEWED` the `Movie` `The Da Vinci Code` which `Tom Hanks` `ACTED_IN`. 

More information can be found in the section on xref::patterns/index.adoc[Patterns].

== Finding recommendations

Cypher allows for more complex queries.
The following query tries to recommend co-actors for `Keanu Reeves`, who he has yet to work with but who his co-actors have worked with. 
The query then orders the results by how frequently a matched co-co-actor has collaborated with one of Keanu Reeves' co-actors. 

.Query
[source, cypher]
----
MATCH (keanu:Person {name:'Keanu Reeves'})-[:ACTED_IN]->(m:Movie)<-[:ACTED_IN]-(coActors:Person),
  (coActors:Person)-[:ACTED_IN]->(m2:Movie)<-[:ACTED_IN]-(cocoActors:Person)
WHERE NOT (keanu)-[:ACTED_IN]->()<-[:ACTED_IN]-(cocoActors) AND keanu <> cocoActors

> RETURN cocoActors.name AS recommended, count(cocoActors) AS strength ORDER BY strength DESC LIMIT 7

Reviewer: ```suggestion
MATCH (keanu:Person {name:'Keanu Reeves'})-[:ACTED_IN]->(:Movie)<-[:ACTED_IN]-(coActor:Person),
  (coActor:Person)-[:ACTED_IN]->(:Movie)<-[:ACTED_IN]-(cocoActor:Person)
WHERE NOT (keanu)-[:ACTED_IN]->()<-[:ACTED_IN]-(cocoActor) AND keanu <> cocoActor
RETURN cocoActor.name AS recommended, count(cocoActor) AS strength 
ORDER BY strength DESC 
LIMIT 7
```

----

.Result
[role="queryresult",options="header,footer",cols="2*<m"]
|===
| recommended | strength

| "Tom Hanks" | 4
| "John Hurt" | 3
| "Jim Broadbent" | 3
| "Halle Berry" | 3
| "Stephen Rea" | 3
| "Natalie Portman" | 3
| "Ben Miles" | 3

2+d|Rows: 5
|===

There are several connections between the `Keanu Reeves` and `Tom Hanks` nodes in the movie database, but the two have never worked together in a film.
The following query matches coactors who could introduce the two, by looking for co-actors who have worked with both of them in separate movies: 

.Query
[source, cypher]
----
MATCH (keanu:Person {name: 'Keanu Reeves'})-[:ACTED_IN]->(m:Movie)<-[:ACTED_IN]-(coActors:Person),
  (coActors)-[:ACTED_IN]->(m2:Movie)<-[:ACTED_IN]-(tom:Person {name:'Tom Hanks'})

> RETURN DISTINCT coActors.name AS coActors

Reviewer: ```suggestion
MATCH (:Person {name: 'Keanu Reeves'})-[:ACTED_IN]->(:Movie)<-[:ACTED_IN]-(coActor:Person),
  (coActor)-[:ACTED_IN]->(:Movie)<-[:ACTED_IN]-(:Person {name:'Tom Hanks'})
RETURN DISTINCT coActor.name AS coActor
```

----

.Result
[role="queryresult",options="header,footer",cols="1*<m"]
|===

> | coActors

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| coActor
```

| "Charlize Theron"
| "Hugo Weaving"

1+d|Rows: 2

|===

== Delete a graph

> To delete all nodes and relationships in a graph, run the following query:

Reviewer: Should there be a warning here about it being slow for large graphs? Also maybe link to more info on deleting if possible

Author: I'm not sure about a warning here - this is just a basic introduction. But I will add a link to the delete page.

Reviewer 2: This is a good reminder to have an example of CALL IN TRANSACTIONS with DETACH DELETE in the DELETE page.

= Basic queries
:description: This section provides an overview of some basic Cypher queries using the Neo4j movie database.

This page contains information about how to create, query, and delete a graph database using Cypher.
For more advanced queries, see the section on xref:subqueries/index.adoc[].

> The examples below uses the publicly available xref:https://github.com/neo4j-graph-examples/movies/tree/main/documentation[Neo4j movie database].

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The examples below uses the publicly available link:https://github.com/neo4j-graph-examples/movies/tree/main/documentation[Neo4j movie database].
```

[source, cypher]
----
MATCH (tom:Person {name:'Tom Hanks'})-[r]->(m:Movie)
RETURN type(r) AS type, m.title AS movie
----

> The returbed table shows that he has 13 outgoing relationships connected to 12 different `Movie` nodes (12 have the `ACTED_IN` type and one has the `DIRECTED` type).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The result shows that he has 13 outgoing relationships connected to 12 different `Movie` nodes (12 have the `ACTED_IN` type and one has the `DIRECTED` type).
```

|===

It is possible to further modify Cypher queries by adding label expressions to the clauses.

> For example, the below query uses a `NOT` label expression (`!`) to return all relationships connected to `Tom Hanks` that do not contain the specified type, `ACTED_IN`. 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
For example, the below query uses a `NOT` label expression (`!`) to return all relationships connected to `Tom Hanks` that are not of type `ACTED_IN`. 
```
